SparseDrive: End-to-End Autonomous Driving via
Sparse Scene Representation

Wenchao Sun1,2

Xuewu Lin2

Yining Shi1

arXiv:2405.19620v2 [cs.CV] 31 May 2024

1

Chuang Zhang1

Tsinghua University

2

Haoran Wu1

Sifa Zheng1

Horizon

Abstract
The well-established modular autonomous driving system is decoupled into different standalone tasks, e.g. perception, prediction and planning, suffering from
information loss and error accumulation across modules. In contrast, end-to-end
paradigms unify multi-tasks into a fully differentiable framework, allowing for
optimization in a planning-oriented spirit. Despite the great potential of end-toend paradigms, both the performance and efficiency of existing methods are not
satisfactory, particularly in terms of planning safety. We attribute this to the computationally expensive BEV (bird’s eye view) features and the straightforward design
for prediction and planning. To this end, we explore the sparse representation
and review the task design for end-to-end autonomous driving, proposing a new
paradigm named SparseDrive. Concretely, SparseDrive consists of a symmetric
sparse perception module and a parallel motion planner. The sparse perception
module unifies detection, tracking and online mapping with a symmetric model
architecture, learning a fully sparse representation of the driving scene. For motion
prediction and planning, we review the great similarity between these two tasks,
leading to a parallel design for motion planner. Based on this parallel design, which
models planning as a multi-modal problem, we propose a hierarchical planning
selection strategy , which incorporates a collision-aware rescore module, to select
a rational and safe trajectory as the final planning output. With such effective
designs, SparseDrive surpasses previous state-of-the-arts by a large margin in
performance of all tasks, while achieving much higher training and inference efficiency. Code will be avaliable at https://github.com/swc-17/SparseDrive
for facilitating future research.

1

Introduction

Traditional autonomous driving system is characterized as modular tasks in sequential order. While
advantageous in interpretation and error tracking, it inevitably leads to information loss and accumulative errors across successive modules, thereby limiting the optimal performance potential of the
system.
Recently, an end-to-end driving paradigm emerged as a promising research direction. This paradigm
integrates all tasks into one holistic model, and can be optimized toward the ultimate pursuit for
planning. However, the existing methods[15, 20] are not satisfactory in terms of performance and
efficiency. On one hand, previous methods rely on computationally expensive BEV features. On the
other hand, the straightforward design for prediction and planning limits the model performance. We
summarize previous methods as BEV-Centric paradigm in Fig. 1a.
To fully leverage the potential of end-to-end paradigm, we review the task design of existing methods,
and argue that three main parallels shared between motion prediction and planning are neglected
as follows: (1) Aiming at predicting future trajectories of surrounding agents and ego vehicle, both
Preprint. Under review.

