1

End-to-end Autonomous Driving:
Challenges and Frontiers

arXiv:2306.16927v3 [cs.RO] 15 Aug 2024

Li Chen, Penghao Wu, Kashyap Chitta, Bernhard Jaeger, Andreas Geiger and Hongyang Li
Abstract—The autonomous driving community has witnessed a rapid growth in approaches that embrace an end-to-end algorithm
framework, utilizing raw sensor input to generate vehicle motion plans, instead of concentrating on individual tasks such as detection
and motion prediction. End-to-end systems, in comparison to modular pipelines, benefit from joint feature optimization for perception
and planning. This field has flourished due to the availability of large-scale datasets, closed-loop evaluation, and the increasing need
for autonomous driving algorithms to perform effectively in challenging scenarios. In this survey, we provide a comprehensive analysis
of more than 270 papers, covering the motivation, roadmap, methodology, challenges, and future trends in end-to-end autonomous
driving. We delve into several critical challenges, including multi-modality, interpretability, causal confusion, robustness, and world
models, amongst others. Additionally, we discuss current advancements in foundation models and visual pre-training, as well as how
to incorporate these techniques within the end-to-end driving framework. We maintain an active repository that contains up-to-date
literature and open-source projects at https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/End-to-end-Autonomous-Driving.
Index Terms—Autonomous Driving, End-to-end System Design, Policy Learning, Simulation.

✦

1

I NTRODUCTION

C

ONVENTIONAL autonomous driving systems adopt a
modular design strategy, wherein each functionality,
such as perception, prediction, and planning, is individually
developed and integrated into onboard vehicles. The planning or control module, responsible for generating steering
and acceleration outputs, plays a crucial role in determining
the driving experience. The most common approach for
planning in modular pipelines involves using sophisticated
rule-based designs, which are often ineffective in addressing
the vast number of situations that occur on road. Therefore,
there is a growing trend to leverage large-scale data and to
use learning-based planning as a viable alternative.
We define end-to-end autonomous driving systems as
fully differentiable programs that take raw sensor data as
input and produce a plan and/or low-level control actions
as output. Fig. 1 (a)-(b) illustrates the difference between
the classical and end-to-end formulation. The conventional
approach feeds the output of each component, such as
bounding boxes and vehicle trajectories, directly into subsequent units (dashed arrows). In contrast, the end-to-end
paradigm propagates feature representations across components (gray solid arrow). The optimized function is set to
be, for example, the planning performance, and the loss
is minimized via back-propagation (red arrow). Tasks are
jointly and globally optimized in this process.
In this survey, we conduct an extensive review of this
emerging topic. Fig. 1 provides an overview of our work. We
begin by discussing the motivation and roadmap for end-toend autonomous driving systems. End-to-end approaches
can be broadly classified into imitation and reinforcement

•

L. Chen and H. Li are with OpenDriveLab, Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai,
China, and the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. P. Wu is
with OpenDriveLab, Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai, China. K. Chitta, B.
Jaeger and A. Geiger are with University of Tübingen and Tübingen AI
Center, Germany. Primary contact: lihongyang@pjlab.org.cn

learning, and we give a brief review of these methodologies.
We cover datasets and benchmarks for both closed and
open-loop evaluation. We summarize a series of critical
challenges, including interpretability, generalization, world
models, causal confusion, etc. We conclude by discussing
future trends that we think should be embraced by the
community to incorporate the latest developments from
data engines, and large foundation models, amongst others.
Note that this review is mainly orchestrated from a theoretical perspective. Engineering efforts such as version control,
unit testing, data servers, data cleaning, software-hardware
co-design, etc., play crucial roles in deploying the end-toend technology. Publicly available information regarding
the latest practices on these topics is limited. We invite the
community towards more openness in future discussions.
1.1

Motivation of an End-to-end System

In the classical pipeline, each model serves a standalone
component and corresponds to a specific task (e.g., traffic
light detection). Such a design is beneficial in terms of
interpretability and ease of debugging. However, since the
optimization objectives across modules are different, with
detection pursuing mean average precision (mAP) while
planning aiming for driving safety and comfort, the entire
system may not be aligned with a unified target, i.e., the
ultimate planning/control task. Errors from each module, as
the sequential procedure proceeds, could be compounded
and result in an information loss. Moreover, compared to
one end-to-end neural network, the multi-task, multi-model
deployment which involves multiple encoders and message
transmission systems, may increase the computational burden and potentially lead to sub-optimal use of compute.
In contrast to its classical counterpart, an end-to-end
autonomous system offers several advantages. (a) The most
apparent merit is its simplicity in combining perception,

